
Bandits discuss raiding a mountain village, but their chief decides to wait until after the harvest 
because they had raided it recently. The plan is overheard by a farmer, and the villagers ask 
Gisaku, the village elder and miller, for advice. He states that he once saw a village that hired 
samurai remain untouched by raiders, and declares they should hire samurai to defend 
themselves. Since they have no money, Gisaku tells them to find hungry samurai.

After little success, the group watch Kambei, an aging but experienced r?nin, rescue a young 
boy who had been taken hostage by a thief. A young samurai named Katsushir? asks to become 
Kambei's disciple. The villagers then ask for help, and after initial reluctance, Kambei agrees. He 
recruits his old friend Shichir?ji and, with Katsushir?'s assistance, three other samurai: the 
friendly, wily Gorobei; the good-willed Heihachi; and Ky?z?, a taciturn master swordsman 
whom Katsushir? regards with awe. Although inexperienced, Katsushir? is accepted because 
time is short. Kikuchiyo, a man who carries a family scroll that he claims proves he is a samurai 
(though the birth date on it is for a young child), follows the group despite attempts to drive 
him away.

On arrival, the samurai find the villagers cowering in their homes, refusing to greet them. 
Feeling insulted by such a cold reception, Kikuchiyo rings the village alarm bell, prompting the 
villagers to come out of hiding. The samurai are both pleased and amused by this, and accept 
him as a comrade-in-arms. Slowly the samurai and farmers begin to trust each other as they 
train together. Katsushir? forms a relationship with Shino, a farmer's daughter, who had been 
masquerading as a boy for protection from the supposedly lustful samurai. However, the six 
samurai are angered when Kikuchiyo brings them armor and weapons, which the villagers most 
likely acquired by killing injured or dying samurai. Kikuchiyo retorts that samurai are 
responsible for battles, raids, taxation and forced labor that devastate the villagers' lives. By so 
doing, he reveals his origin as an orphaned farmer's son. The samurais' anger turns to shame.

Three bandit scouts are spotted. Two are killed, while another reveals the location of their 
camp. Against the wishes of the samurai, the villagers kill the prisoner. The samurai burn down 
the bandits' camp in a pre-emptive strike. Rikichi, a troubled villager who helps the samurai, 
breaks down when he sees his wife, who had apparently been kidnapped and made a 
concubine in a previous raid. On seeing Rikichi, she walks back into her burning hut. Heihachi is 
killed trying to save Rikichi, whose grief is compounded.

When the bandits finally attack, they are confounded by new fortifications, including a moat 
and wooden fence. Several bandits are killed according to Kambei's plan: The bandits are 
allowed to enter the village singly, to be hunted down and killed by groups of farmers armed 
with bamboo spears. Gisaku refuses to abandon his mill on the outskirts of the village and 
perishes with his family, who tried to save him. A lone baby is rescued by Kikuchiyo, who breaks 
down in tears, as it reminds him of his own childhood.

The bandits possess three Japanese matchlock firearms. Ky?z? ventures out alone and returns 
with one. An envious Kikuchiyo abandons his post-and his contingent of farmers-to bring 
back another. He is chastised by Kambei because, while he was gone, the bandits killed some of 
his farmers. The bandits attack again, and Gorobei is slain. That night, Kambei predicts that, due 
to their dwindling numbers, the bandits will make one last all-out attack. Meanwhile, 
Katsushir? and Shino's relationship is discovered by her father. He hits her until Kambei and the 
villagers intervene. Shichir?ji calms everyone down by saying the couple should be forgiven 
because they are young and that before any battle, passions can run high.

The next morning in a torrential downpour, Kambei orders that the remaining thirteen bandits 
be allowed into the village. As the battle winds down, their leader, armed with a gun, enters the 
women's hut, from where he shoots Ky?z?. An enraged Kikuchiyo charges the hut; he is shot, 
but kills the bandit chief before dying.

The three surviving samurai watch as the joyful villagers sing while planting their crops. 
Kambei-standing beneath the funeral mounds of their four comrades-reflects that it is 
another pyrrhic victory for the samurai: "In the end we lost this battle too. The victory belongs 
to the farmers, not to us."
