The film begins with a scene of chickens being prepared for a meal. A chicken escapes and an 
armed gang chases after it in a favela called the Cidade de Deus ("City of God"). The chicken 
stops between the gang and a young man named Rocket (Buscap?). A flashback traces Rocket, 
the narrator, back to the late 1960s.

In the 1960s, the favela is a newly built housing project far from the centre of Rio de Janeiro, 
with little access to electricity and water. Three impoverished, amateur thieves known as the 
"Tender Trio" - Shaggy, Clipper, and Goose - rob and loot business owners; Goose is Rocket's 
older brother. The thieves split part of the loot with the citizens of the City and are protected by 
them in return. Several younger boys idolize the trio, and one, Li'l Dice (Dadinho), convinces 
them to hold up a motel and rob its occupants. The gang resolves not to kill anyone and tells Li'l 
Dice to serve as a lookout. Instead, after the Li'l Dice falsely warns the trio that the police are 
coming, he guns down the motel inhabitants. The massacre is brought to the police's attention, 
forcing the trio to split up: Clipper joins the church, Shaggy is shot by the police while trying to 
escape the favela, and Goose is shot by Li'l Dice after taking the thieving boy's money while Li'l 
Dice's friend Benny (Ben?), who is Shaggy's brother, watches.

In the 1970s, the favela has been transformed into an urban jungle. Rocket has joined a group 
of young hippies. He enjoys photography and likes one girl, Angelica, but his attempt to get 
close to her are ruined by a gang of petty criminal kids known as "The Runts". Li'l Dice now calls 
himself "Li'l Z?" ("Z? Pequeno"). With Benny, he has established a drug empire by eliminating 
all of the competition, except for a dealer named Carrot. Carrot is a good friend of Benny's and 
Benny convinces Lil Z? not to go after him. Lil Z? takes over 'the apartment', a known drug 
distribution center, and forces Carrot's manager Blackie (Neguinho) to work for him instead. 
Coincidently, Rocket is visiting the apartment to get some drugs off Blacky (who is an old 
classmate of Rocket's) during the apartment raid and is caught in the middle of it. Through 
narration, Rocket tells the viewer that he momentarily considers attempting to kill Lil Z? to 
avenge his brother but decides against it. He is let go after Benny tells Lil Z? that Rocket is 
Goose's brother.

Some time later, a relative peace comes over the City of God under the reign of Li'l Z?, who 
manages to avoid police attention. Benny decides to branch out of the drug dealer crowd and 
convinces Tiago, Angelica's ex-boyfriend, to get him some new clothes. Tiago also introduces 
Benny to his (and Rocket's) group of friends, and Benny and Angelica begin dating. Together, 
they decide to leave the City and the drug trade. During Benny's farewell party, Z? and Benny 
get into an argument and Blackie accidentally kills Benny while trying to shoot Li'l Z?. As Benny 
was the only man holding Lil Z? back from taking over Carrot's business, his death leaves Lil Z? 
unchecked, and Carrot kills Blackie for endangering his life. Following Benny's death, Lil Z? and 
a group of his soldiers start to make their way to Carrot's hideout with the intention of killing 
him. On the way, Lil Z? stops to hit on a girl who dismisses him. Z? follows the girl and beats up 
her boyfriend, a peaceful man named Knockout Ned (Mane Galinha), and rapes her. After Ned's 
brother stabs Lil Z?, his gang retaliates by killing his brother and uncle. Ned, looking for 
revenge, sides with Carrot, and a war breaks out between Carrot and Lil Z?.

A year later in the early 1980s, the war continues and even the reason for the war is forgotten. 
Both sides enlist more "soldiers" and Lil Z? specifically gives the Runts weapons. One day, Lil Z? 
has Rocket take photos of him and his gang. After Rocket leaves his film with a friend who 
works at a newspaper office downtown, a female reporter publishes one of the prints, a major 
scoop since nobody is able to safely enter the City of God anymore. Rocket believes his life is 
endangered, as he thinks Lil Z? will kill him for publishing the photo of him and his gang. The 
reporter takes Rocket in for the night, and he loses his virginity to her. Unbeknownst to him, Lil 
Z? is excited about the picture being published, as he believes that now, people will finally 
know who he is.

Rocket agrees to continue taking photographs, not realizing that Lil Z? is pleased with his 
increased notoriety. Rocket returns to the City for more photographs, which brings the film 
back to its opening scene. Confronted by the gang, Rocket is surprised that Z? asks him to take 
pictures, but as he prepares to take the photo, the police arrive, then drive off when Carrot 
arrives. In the ensuing gunfight, Ned is killed by a boy who has infiltrated his gang to avenge his 
father, a civilian whom Ned has shot. The police capture Li'l Z? and Carrot and plan to show 
Carrot off to the media. Since Lil Z? has been bribing the police, they take Lil Z?'s money and let 
him go, but Rocket secretly photographs the scene. Lil Z? is immediately murdered by the Runts 
who intend to run the criminal enterprise themselves. The death is also out of revenge for the 
Runt that Lil Z? had one of his initiates kill. Rocket photographs Z?'s dead body and brings both 
pictures to the newspaper.

Rocket contemplates whether to publish the photo of the cops, exposing corruption and 
becoming famous, or the photo of Li'l Z?'s body, which will get him an internship at the 
newspaper. He decides on the latter and the film ends with the Runts walking around the City 
of God, making a hit list of the dealers they plan to kill to take over the drug business, including 
the Red Brigade, as well as people they simply don't like
