Travis Bickle, a 26-year-old honorably discharged U.S. Marine, is a lonely, depressed young man 
living on his own in New York City. He takes a job as a taxi driver to cope with his chronic 
insomnia, driving passengers every night around the city's boroughs. He also frequents the porn 
theaters on 42nd Street and keeps a diary in which he consciously attempts to include 
aphorisms, such as "You're only as healthy as you feel."

Travis becomes infatuated with Betsy, a campaign volunteer for Senator and presidential 
candidate Charles Palantine. After watching her interact with fellow worker Tom through her 
window, Travis enters to volunteer, as a pretext to talk to her, and takes her out for coffee. On 
a later date, he takes her to see a pornographic film, which offends her, and she goes home 
alone. His attempts at reconciliation by sending flowers are rebuffed, so he berates her at the 
campaign office, before being kicked out by Tom.

Travis confides in fellow taxi driver Wizard about his thoughts, which are beginning to turn 
violent; however, Wizard assures him that he will be fine, leaving Travis to his own destructive 
path. Travis is disgusted by the sleaze, dysfunction, and prostitution that he witnesses 
throughout the city, and attempts to find an outlet for his frustrations by beginning a program 
of intense physical training. A fellow taxi driver refers Travis to an illegal gun dealer, Easy Andy, 
from whom Travis buys a number of handguns. At home, Travis practices drawing his weapons 
and constructs a sleeve gun to hide and then quickly deploy a gun from his sleeve. One night, 
Travis enters a convenience store moments before an attempted armed robbery, and he fatally 
shoots the robber. The shop owner takes credit for the deed, taking Travis' handgun.

Earlier, an adolescent prostitute and runaway, Iris, had entered Travis' cab, attempting to 
escape her pimp, Matthew "Sport" Higgins. Sport dragged Iris from the cab and threw Travis a 
crumpled $20 bill, which continually reminds Travis of her and the corruption that surrounds 
him. Sometime later, Travis hires Iris, but instead of having sex with her, attempts to dissuade 
her from continuing in prostitution. He fails to completely turn her from her course, but she 
does agree to meet with him for breakfast the next day. Travis leaves a letter to Iris at his 
apartment saying he will soon be dead, and money for her to return home.

After shaving his head into a mohawk, Travis attends a public rally where he plans to 
assassinate Palantine, but Secret Service agents notice him with his hand in his coat and chase 
him off. Travis flees and later goes to the East Village to invade Sport's brothel. A violent 
gunfight ensues, and Travis kills Sport, a bouncer, and a mafioso. Travis is severely injured with 
multiple gunshot wounds. Iris witnesses the fight and, hysterical with fear, pleads with Travis to 
stop the killing. After the gunfight, Travis attempts suicide, but has run out of ammunition and 
resigns himself to lying on a sofa until police arrive. When they do, he places his index finger 
against his temple, pantomiming the act of shooting himself.

Having recovered from his wounds and returned to work, Travis finds himself hailed as a local 
hero in the press for shooting the three men. He receives a letter from Iris' father, thanking him 
for saving her life and revealing that she has returned home to Pittsburgh, where she is going to 
school. Later, Travis reconciles with Betsy when dropping her off at her home in his cab. When 
she tries to pay her fare, he smiles at her and turns off the meter. As Travis drives off, he 
suddenly becomes agitated after noticing something in his rear-view mirror.
