David (Colin Farrell) is escorted to a hotel after his wife has left him for another man. The hotel manager reveals that single people have 45 days to find a partner, or they will be transformed into an animal; the dog accompanying David is his brother. David chooses to become a lobster, due to their life cycle and his love of the sea. David makes acquaintances with Robert, a man with a lisp, and John, a man with a limp, who become his quasi-friends. John explains that he was injured in an attempt to reconnect with his mother, who had been transformed into a wolf.
The hotel has many rules and rituals:masturbationis banned, butsexual stimulationby the hotelmaidis mandatory, and guests attend dances and watchpropagandaextolling advantages of partnership.
Robert is caught masturbating, and the hotel manager burns his fingers in a toaster. Relationships require partners to have a distinguishing trait in common. John is told a woman has arrived with a limp, but he says she limps from an injury that will heal and is not a suitable match.
Residents can extend their deadline by hunting and tranquilizing the single people who live in the forest; each captured "loner" earns them a day. On one hunt, a woman with a fondness for biscuits offers David sexual favours, which he declines. She tells him that if she fails to find a mate, she will kill herself by jumping from a hotel window.
John then wins the affections of a woman with constant nosebleeds by purposely smashing his nose in secret. They move to the couples section to begin a month-long trial partnership. David later decides to court a notoriously cruel woman who has tranquilized more loners than anyone else. Their initial conversation is interrupted by the screams of the biscuit-loving woman, who has severely injured herself jumping from a window. Although troubled by the incident, David pretends to enjoy the woman's suffering to gain the heartless woman's interest. He later joins her in a jacuzzi, and she begins choking; when he does not attempt help, she decides they are a match. The two are shifted to the couples' suite. When David wakes up one morning, he finds she has kicked David's brother (in dog form) to death. When David cries in response, she concludes their relationship is a lie and drags him to the hotel manager to have him punished by turning him into an animal that no one likes. However, he escapes and, with the help of a sympathetic maid, tranquilizes and transforms his partner into an unspecified animal.
Escaping the hotel, David joins the loners in the woods. In contrast to the hotel's rules, they forbid any romance, with mutilation as punishment. The hotel maid is a mole for the loners, planted in the hotel to sabotage it. The leader of the loners (La Seydoux) takes loners to visit the city to get some supplies.
The loners launch a mini-raid to sabotage the hotel's work. David reveals to the nosebleed woman that John has been faking. John forces David to leave. Other loners hold the hotel manager and her husband at gunpoint, tricking him into shooting his wife to save himself, but the gun is not loaded, leaving the couple to face each other.
Soon David, who isshortsighted, begins a secret relationship with a shortsighted woman (Rachel Weisz). They develop a gestural code for communication. They plan to escape together, but the mole who is now with the camp finds the shortsighted woman's journal and discovers her plan to escape with David. She takes the woman to the city, ostensibly to have an operation to cure her shortsightedness, but blinds her instead. In anger, the woman kills the hotel maid, thinking she is killing the leader.
She tells David about her blindness. They try to find something else they have in common, to no avail. He says they'll figure it out, and tells her to continue with their plan. Early the next morning, David overpowers and ties up the leader, leaving her in what appears to be his grave. He and the blind woman escape to the city, stopping at a restaurant. Seeking to reestablish sameness, David goes to the restroom and prepares to blind himself with a steak knife. The now blind woman waits at the table for him to return as the waiter tends to her...after which she continues to wait.


