In Nazi-occupied Poland, 12-year-old Erik Lehnsherris separated from his parents upon entering the Auschwitz concentration camp. While trying to reach them, he causes a set of metal gates to bend towards him as the result of his mutant ability to createmagnetic fieldsand control metal manifesting, only to be knocked out by theguards. In the not too distant future,U.S. SenatorRobert Kellyattempts to pass a "Mutant Registration Act" inCongress, which would force mutants to publicly reveal their identities and abilities. Present are Lehnsherr, now going by the name "Magneto", and histelepathiccolleagueProfessor Charles Xavier. Seeing Lehnsherr in attendance, Xavier becomes concerned with how he will respond to the Registration Act.Meanwhile, inMeridian, Mississippi, 17-year-oldMarie D'Ancantoaccidentally puts her boyfriend into acomaupon kissing him as the result of her mutant ability to absorb the powers and life force of others manifesting. She runs away from home and adopts the name Rogue. In Alberta, she meets Logan, also known asWolverine, who possesses superhuman healing abilities and metal "claws" that protrude from between his knuckles. While on the road together, they are attacked by a minion of Magneto's,Sabretooth, until two of Xavier's studentsCyclopsandStormarrive and save them. Wolverine and Rogue are brought toXavier's mansionand school for mutants inWestchester County, New York. Xavier tells Logan that Magneto appears to have taken an interest in Wolverine, and he asks him to stay while Xavier's mutants, the X-Men, investigate why. Rogue meanwhile enrolls in the school.Senator Kelly is abducted by two more of Magneto's minions,ToadandMystiqueand is brought to their hideout on the uncharted island ofGenosha. There, Magneto uses Kelly as atest subjectfor a machine powered by his magnetic abilities that generates a field ofradiation, inducing mutation in normal humans. Kelly later escapes by taking advantage of his newfound mutation. When Rogue uses her power on Wolverine in view of her classmates, she is convinced by Mystique, who disguises herself as Rogue's crushBobby Drake, that Xavier is angry with her and she should leave the school. Xavier uses his mutant-locating machineCerebroto find Rogue at a train station, and the X-Men go to retrieve her. Meanwhile, Mystique enters Cerebro and sabotages it.Having left ahead of Storm and Cyclops, Wolverine finds Rogue on a train and convinces her to return to the school. Before they can leave, however, Magneto arrives and reveals that he is after Rogue rather than Wolverine. Although Xavier attempts to stop Magneto by mentally controlling Sabretooth, he is forced to release his hold on Sabretooth when Magneto threatens the police who have converged on the train station, allowing Magneto's Brotherhood to escape with Rogue. Kelly arrives at Xavier's school, and Xavier reads his mind to learn about Magneto's machine. Realizing the strain of powering it nearly killed Magneto, the group deduces he intends to transfer his powers to Rogue and use her to power it at the cost of her life. Kelly's body rejects his mutation, and his body dissolves into liquid. Xavier attempts to locate Rogue using Cerebro, but Mystique's sabotage incapacitates him, and he falls into a coma. Fellow  telekinetic/telepath Jean Greyfixes Cerebro and uses it, learning that Magneto plans to place his mutation-inducing machine on Liberty Islandand use it to "mutate" the world leaders meeting at a summit on nearbyEllis Island. The X-Men scale theStatue of Liberty, battling the Brotherhood while Magneto transfers his powers to Rogue and activates the mutating machine. As Wolverine confronts and distracts Magneto, Cyclops blasts him away, allowing Wolverine to destroy the machine. He transfers his powers to Rogue and his healing abilities rejuvenate her, while incapacitating himself.Professor Xavier and Wolverine recover from their comas. The group also learn that Mystique escaped the island battle and is impersonating Senator Kelly. Xavier gives Wolverine a lead to his past at an abandoned military installation in Canada. Magneto is imprisoned in a complex constructed of plastic and is visited by Xavier, and Magneto warns him he intends to escape one day and continue the fight.
