The film opens in 1935 when Lawrence is killed in a motorcycle accident. At his memorial 
service at St Paul's Cathedral, a reporter tries (with little success) to gain insights into this 
remarkable, enigmatic man from those who knew him.

The story then moves backward to the First World War, where Lawrence is a misfit British Army 
lieutenant, notable for his insolence and education. Over the objections of General Murray, Mr. 
Dryden of the Arab Bureau sends him to assess the prospects of Prince Faisal in his revolt 
against the Turks. On the journey, his Bedouin guide is killed by Sherif Ali for drinking from his 
well without permission. Lawrence later meets Colonel Brighton, who orders him to keep quiet, 
make his assessment, and leave. Lawrence ignores Brighton's orders when he meets Faisal. His 
outspokenness piques the prince's interest.

Brighton advises Faisal to retreat after a major defeat, but Lawrence proposes a daring surprise 
attack on Aqaba; its capture would provide a port from which the British could offload much-
needed supplies. The town is strongly fortified against a naval assault but only lightly defended 
on the landward side. He convinces Faisal to provide fifty men, led by a sceptical Sherif Ali. 
Teenage orphans Daud and Farraj attach themselves to Lawrence as servants. They cross the 
Nefud Desert, considered impassable even by the Bedouins, travelling day and night on the last 
stage to reach water. One of Ali's men, Gasim, succumbs to fatigue and falls off his camel 
unnoticed during the night. When Lawrence discovers him missing, he turns back and rescues 
Gasim-and Sherif Ali is won over. He gives Lawrence Arab robes to wear.

Lawrence persuades Auda abu Tayi, the leader of the powerful local Howeitat tribe, to turn 
against the Turks. Lawrence's scheme is almost derailed when one of Ali's men kills one of 
Auda's because of a blood feud. Howeitat retaliation would shatter the fragile alliance, so 
Lawrence declares that he will execute the murderer himself. He is then stunned to discover 
that the culprit is Gasim, the very man whom he risked his own life to save in the desert, but he 
shoots him anyway.

The next morning, the Arabs overrun the Turkish garrison. Lawrence heads to Cairo to inform 
Dryden and the new commander, General Allenby, of his victory. While crossing the Sinai 
Desert, Daud dies when he stumbles into quicksand. Lawrence is promoted to major and given 
arms and money for the Arabs. He is deeply disturbed, however, confessing that he enjoyed 
executing Gasim, but Allenby brushes aside his qualms. He asks Allenby whether there is any 
basis for the Arabs' suspicions that the British have designs on Arabia. When pressed, the 
general states that they do not.

Part II
Lawrence launches a guerrilla war, blowing up trains and harassing the Turks at every turn. 
American war correspondent Jackson Bentley publicises Lawrence's exploits, making him 
famous. On one raid, Farraj is badly injured. Unwilling to leave him to be tortured by the 
enemy, Lawrence shoots him dead before fleeing.

When Lawrence scouts the enemy-held city of Deraa with Ali, he is taken, along with several 
Arab residents, to the Turkish Bey. Lawrence is stripped, ogled, and prodded. Then, for striking 
out at the Bey, he is severely flogged before being thrown into the street. The experience 
leaves Lawrence shaken. He returns to British headquarters in Cairo but does not fit in.

A short time later in Jerusalem, General Allenby urges him to support the "big push" on 
Damascus. Lawrence hesitates to return but finally relents.

Lawrence recruits an army that is motivated more by money than by the Arab cause. They sight 
a column of retreating Turkish soldiers who have just massacred the residents of Tafas. One of 
Lawrence's men is from Tafas; he demands, "No prisoners!" When Lawrence hesitates, the man 
charges the Turks alone and is killed. Lawrence takes up the dead man's battle cry; the result is 
a slaughter in which Lawrence himself participates. Afterwards, he regrets his actions.

Lawrence's men take Damascus ahead of Allenby's forces. The Arabs set up a council to 
administer the city, but the desert tribesmen prove ill-suited for such a task. Despite Lawrence's 
efforts, they bicker constantly. Unable to maintain the public utilities, the Arabs soon abandon 
most of the city to the British.

Lawrence is promoted to colonel and immediately ordered back to Britain, as his usefulness to 
both Faisal and the British is at an end. As he leaves the city, his automobile is passed by a 
motorcyclist who leaves a trail of dust in his wake.

