Benjamin Braddock, aged twenty-one, has earned his bachelor's degree from Williams College 
and has returned home to a party celebrating his graduation at his parents' house in Pasadena, 
California. Benjamin, visibly uncomfortable as his parents deliver accolades and neighborhood 
friends ask him about his future plans, evades those who try to congratulate him. Mrs. 
Robinson, the neglected wife of his father's law partner, insists that he drive her home. 
Benjamin is coerced inside to have a drink and Mrs. Robinson attempts to seduce him. She 
invites him up to her daughter Elaine's room to see her portrait and then enters the room 
naked, making it clear that she is available to him. Benjamin initially rebuffs her but a few days 
later after his scuba demonstration on his birthday, he clumsily organizes a tryst at the Taft 
hotel.

Benjamin spends the remainder of the summer drifting around in the pool by day, purposefully 
neglecting to select a graduate school, and seeing Mrs. Robinson at the hotel by night. He 
discovers that he and Mrs. Robinson have nothing to talk about. However, after Benjamin 
pesters her one evening, Mrs. Robinson reveals that she entered into a loveless marriage when 
she accidentally became pregnant with Elaine. Both Mr. Robinson and Benjamin's parents 
encourage him to call Elaine, even though Mrs. Robinson makes her disapproval clear.

Benjamin takes Elaine on a date but tries to sabotage it by ignoring her, driving recklessly and 
taking her to a strip club. After Elaine runs out of the strip club in tears, Benjamin has a change 
of heart, realizes how rude he has been to her, and discovers that Elaine is someone with whom 
he is comfortable. In search of a late-night drink they visit the Taft hotel but when the staff 
greet Benjamin as "Mr. Gladstone" (the name he uses during his rendezvous with Mrs. 
Robinson) Elaine correctly guesses that he has been having an affair with a married woman and 
accepts his assurances that the affair is now over. To preempt a furious Mrs. Robinson, who 
threatens to tell Elaine her version of their affair, Benjamin tells Elaine that the married woman 
was her mother. Elaine is distraught and returns to Berkeley. Benjamin pursues her there and 
tries to talk to her. She reveals that her mother's story is that he raped her while she was drunk, 
and refuses to believe that it was in fact her mother who seduced Benjamin. After much 
discussion over several days, Benjamin begins to make inroads with Elaine. However, Mr. 
Robinson arrives at Berkeley after learning about the affair, confronts Benjamin at his rooming 
house, and threatens to put him behind bars if Benjamin sees his daughter again. Mr. Robinson 
then forces Elaine to drop out of college and takes her away to marry Carl, a classmate with 
whom she had briefly been involved.

Returning to Pasadena in search of Elaine, Benjamin breaks into the Robinson home but 
encounters Mrs. Robinson. She tells him he will not be able to stop the wedding and then calls 
the police claiming that her house is being burgled. Benjamin visits Carl's fraternity brothers 
who tell him that the wedding is in Santa Barbara, California that very morning. He rushes to 
the church and arrives just as Elaine is married. He bangs on the glass at the back of the church 
and screams out "Elaine!" repeatedly. After a brief hesitation, Elaine screams out "Ben!" and 
starts to run toward him. A brawl ensues as guests try to stop Elaine and Benjamin from leaving 
together. Elaine manages to break free from her mother, who then slaps her. Benjamin 
manages to keep the guests at bay by jamming a large cross into the doors of the church. Both 
he and Elaine then run into the street to flag down a passing bus and take the back seat. 
Although initially elated at their victory, the pair become increasingly uncomfortable as they 
journey towards an uncertain future.
