An elderly veteran visits the Normandy American Cemetery and Memorial with his family. Upon 
seeing one particular grave, he falls to his knees overcome with emotion. The scene then shifts 
to the morning of June 6, 1944, as American soldiers land on Omaha Beach as part of the 
Normandy Invasion. They suffer heavy losses in assaulting German defensive positions of 
artillery and machine guns raining down intense fire on the American forces. Captain John H. 
Miller of the 2nd Ranger Battalion assembles a group to penetrate the German defenses, 
leading to a breakout from the beach. Elsewhere on the beach, a dead soldier lies face-down in 
the bloody surf; his pack is stenciled Ryan, S.

In Washington, D.C., at the U.S. War Department, General George Marshall learns that three of 
the four brothers of the Ryan family were killed in action and that the fourth son, James, has 
been parachuted somewhere over Normandy but is currently unable to be located. He is also 
informed that their mother will receive all three telegrams notifying her of her three sons' 
deaths on the same day. After reading Abraham Lincoln's Bixby letter aloud for his staff, he 
orders that James Ryan be found and returned home immediately.

Three days after D-Day, Miller receives orders to find Ryan and bring him back from the front. 
He assembles six men from his company-T/Sgt. Mike Horvath, Privates First Class Richard 
Reiben and Adrian Caparzo, Privates Stanley Mellish and Danny Jackson, medic Irwin Wade-
plus T/5 Timothy Upham, a cartographer and interpreter borrowed from another unit. They 
move out to Neuville, where they meet a squad from the 101st Airborne Division, where 
Caparzo is killed by a German sniper, quickly taken out by Jackson. They locate a Private James 
Ryan but quickly learn he is not their man. They eventually encounter a friend of James Ryan, 
who tells them that he is defending an important bridge in the town of Ramelle.

On the way to Ramelle, Miller decides to neutralize a German machine gun position at a 
derelict radar station, despite his men's misgivings; Wade is killed in the skirmish. Miller, at 
Upham's urging, declines to execute a surviving German soldier (nicknamed "Steamboat 
Willie") and sets him free on the condition that he surrender to the first Allied unit he 
encounters. Losing confidence in Miller's leadership, Reiben declares his intention to desert, 
prompting a confrontation with Horvath, which Miller defuses by disclosing his civilian 
background as a teacher, about which his men had set up a betting pool. Reiben reluctantly 
decides to stay.

Outside Ramelle, Miller and the squad encounters a German half-track with troops and ambush 
them together with three paratroopers, one of whom is Ryan. In the town, Miller's squad find a 
small group of paratroopers preparing to defend the key bridge, and where Miller tells Ryan 
about his brothers and their orders to bring him home, with two of his men having been lost in 
finding him. He is distressed at the loss of his brothers, but asks Miller to tell his mother that he 
intends to stay "with the only brothers [he has] left." Miller decides to join his unit with the 
paratroopers in defense of the bridge against the imminent German attack. Miller forms 
ambush positions throughout the ruined town, preparing to attack arriving tanks and infantry 
with mines, Molotov cocktails, detonation cords and "sticky bombs" made from socks filled 
with Composition B smeared with thick grease.

Elements of the 2nd SS Panzer Division arrive with infantry and armor, comprising two Tiger I 
tanks and two Marder tank destroyers/light assault guns. Although they managed to inflict 
heavy casualties on the Germans, including destroying one Tiger tank and both Marders, most 
of the paratroopers, along with Jackson, Mellish and Horvath are killed, while Upham avoids 
fighting due to his jittery nerves and hides himself from his German foes. Miller attempts to 
blow up the bridge, but is shot and mortally wounded by Steamboat Willie, who had somehow 
rejoined the Germans. In confusion and supposed desperation after suffering intense German 
fire, Miller crawls to the middle of the bridge and attempts to open fire on the oncoming 
German tank and accompanying troops with his pistol. Just before the last Tiger tank reaches 
the bridge, an American P-51 Mustang flies overhead and destroys the tank, followed by 
American armored units which rout the remaining Germans. Witnessing Miller's shooting, 
Upham leaps out from his hiding and confronts Steamboat Willie and his group as they attempt 
to retreat. Steamboat Willie raises his hands in surrender and smiles, believing that Upham will 
accept because of their earlier encounter. Instead, Upham kills him, but lets the other Germans 
flee.

Reiben and Ryan are with Miller as he dies and utters his last words, "James...earn this. Earn it."

The elderly veteran is revealed to be Ryan and the grave he is standing at is Miller's. Ryan 
expresses his appreciation for what Miller and the others did for him. He then asks his wife if he 
is a "good man" worthy of their sacrifices, to which she tells him he is. Ryan comes to attention 
and salutes Miller's grave.
