In Portland, Oregon in 1965, Glenn Holland is a talented musician and composer who has been 
relatively successful in the exhausting life of a professional musical performer. However, in an 
attempt to enjoy more free time with his young wife, Iris, and to enable him to compose a piece 
of orchestral music, the 30-year-old Holland accepts a teaching position at John F. Kennedy 
High School.

Unfortunately for Holland, he is soon forced to realize that his position as a music teacher 
makes him a marginalized figure in the faculty's hierarchy. Many of his colleagues, and some in 
Kennedy High's administration, including the school's vice principal Gene Wolters, resent 
Holland and question the value and importance of music education given the school's strained 
budget. However, he quickly begins to win many of his colleagues over. Holland finds success 
using rock and roll as a way to make classical music more accessible to his students.

Holland's lack of quality time with Iris becomes problematic when their son, Cole, is found to be 
deaf. Holland reacts with hostility to the news that he can never teach the joys of music to his 
own child. Iris willingly learns American Sign Language to communicate with her son, but 
Holland resists. This causes further estrangement within his family.

As the years progress, Holland grows closer to his students at Kennedy High and more distant 
from his own son. He addresses a series of challenges created by people who are either 
hesitant or hostile towards the concept of musical excellence within the walls of the average 
American high school. He inspires numerous students, but never has private time for himself or 
his family, delaying the completion of his own orchestral composition. Eventually, he reaches 
an age when it is too late to have a realistic chance of finding financial backing, or ever having it 
performed.

In 1995, the adversaries of the Kennedy High music program win a decisive institutional victory. 
Wolters, now promoted to principal, works with the board of education to eliminate funding for 
music along with other fine arts programs, thus leading to Holland's early retirement. Holland 
realizes that his career in music is likely over, thinking that his former students have mostly 
forgotten him and is dejected at his failure ever to have his composition, which he views as his 
life's work, performed.

On his final day as a teacher, Holland enters the school auditorium, where his professional life is 
surprisingly redeemed. Hearing that their beloved teacher is retiring, hundreds of his former 
students have secretly returned to the school to celebrate his life.

Holland's orchestral piece, never before heard in public, has been put before the musicians by 
his wife and son. One of his most musically challenged students, Gertrude Lang, now the 
Governor of Oregon, takes the podium and explains to Holland that the symphony he wrote is 
not his only legacy... it's the people he has inspired and taught, all of the people he has helped 
to make a better person, that is his true legacy. Gov. Lang then sits among the musicians with 
her clarinet, but not before asking Holland to step on up on stage and serve as their conductor 
for the premiere performance of Mr. Holland's Opus ("The American Symphony"). A proud Iris 
and Cole look on, appreciating the affection and respect that Holland receives.
