In 2005, Steve Lopez (Robert Downey, Jr.) is a journalist working for the Los Angeles Times. He 
is divorced and now works for his ex-wife, Mary (Catherine Keener), an editor. A biking accident 
lands Lopez in a hospital.

One day, he hears a violin being played beautifully. Investigating, he encounters Nathaniel 
Ayers (Jamie Foxx), a homeless man with schizophrenia, who is playing a violin when Lopez 
introduces himself. During the conversation that follows, Lopez learns that Ayers once attended 
Juilliard.

Curious as to how a former student of such a prestigious school ended up on the streets, Lopez 
contacts Juilliard but learns that no record of Ayers graduating from it exists. Though at first 
figuring a man with schizophrenia who's talented with a cello isn't worth his time, Lopez soon 
realizes that he has no better story to write about. Luckily, he soon learns that Ayers did attend 
Juilliard, but dropped out after two years.

Finding Ayers the next day, Lopez says he wants to write about him. Ayers doesn't appear to be 
paying attention. Getting nowhere, Lopez finds and contacts Ayers' sister (Lisa Gay Hamilton), 
who gives the columnist the information he needs: Ayers was once a child prodigy with the 
cello, until he began displaying symptoms of schizophrenia at Juilliard. Unable to handle the 
voices, Ayers dropped out and ended up on the streets due to the delusion that his sister 
wanted to kill him. Without a cello, he has resorted to playing a two-string violin.

Lopez writes his article. One reader is so touched that she sends him a cello for Ayers. Lopez 
brings it to him and Ayers shows he is just as proficient as with a violin. Unfortunately, his 
tendency to wander puts both Ayers and the cello in danger, so Lopez talks him into leaving it 
at a shelter, located in a neighborhood of homeless people. Ayers is later seen playing for the 
homeless.

A concerned Lopez tries to get a doctor he knows (Nelsan Ellis) to help. He also tries to talk 
Ayers into getting an apartment, but Ayers refuses. After seeing a reaction to music played at 
an opera house, Lopez persuades another friend, Graham (Tom Hollander), a cellist, to 
rehabilitate Ayers through music. The lessons go well, though Ayers is shown to be getting a 
little too attached to Lopez, much to the latter's annoyance. Lopez eventually talks Ayers into 
moving into an apartment by threatening to abandon him.

Through Lopez's article on Ayers, Ayers gains so much fame that he is given the chance to 
perform a recital. Sadly, he loses his temper, attacks Graham, and leaves. This convinces Lopez's 
doctor friend to get Ayers help. But when Ayers learns what Lopez is up to, he throws Lopez out 
of his apartment and threatens to kill him.

While speaking with Mary, Lopez realizes that not only has he changed Ayers' life, but Ayers has 
changed him. Determined to make amends, Lopez brings Ayers' sister to L.A. for a visit. Ayers 
and Lopez make up. Later, while all watch an orchestra, Lopez ponders how beneficial their 
friendship has been. Ayers still hears voices, but at least he no longer lives on the streets. In 
addition, Ayers has helped improve Lopez's relationship with his own family.

It is revealed at the end that Ayers is still a member of the LAMP Community - a Los Angeles 
nonprofit organization that seeks to help people living with severe mental illness - and that 
Lopez is learning how to play the guitar.

