In the winter of 1987, Jerry Lundegaard, the sales manager at an Oldsmobile dealership in 
Minneapolis, is desperate for money. He floated a $320,000 GMAC loan and collateralized it 
with nonexistent dealership vehicles and is unable to pay back the loan. On the advice of 
dealership mechanic and paroled ex-convict Shep Proudfoot, Jerry travels to Fargo, North 
Dakota and hires small-time cons Gaear Grimsrud and Carl Showalter to kidnap his wife, Jean, 
and extort a ransom from his wealthy father-in-law and boss, Wade Gustafson, in return for a 
new car and half of the $80,000 ransom.

Jerry pitches Gustafson a lucrative real estate deal, and he agrees to front $750,000. Jerry 
considers calling off the kidnapping, but learns that Gustafson plans to make the deal himself, 
giving Jerry a finder's fee. At Jerry's home, Carl and Gaear carry out the kidnapping. As they 
transport Jean to their remote cabin on Moose Lake, a state trooper pulls them over outside 
Brainerd for driving without temporary tags. When the trooper hears a sound from the back 
seat, Gaear kills him, then chases down two eyewitnesses and shoots them.

The following morning, Brainerd police chief Marge Gunderson discovers that the dead trooper 
was ticketing a car with dealership plates. Later, two men driving a dealership vehicle checked 
into the nearby Blue Ox Motel with two call girls, then placed a call to Proudfoot. After 
questioning the prostitutes, she drives to Gustafson's dealership, where Proudfoot feigns 
ignorance and Jerry insists no cars are missing. While in Minneapolis, Marge reconnects with 
Mike Yanagita, an old classmate. Mike awkwardly and aggressively tries to romance Marge, 
before breaking down, saying his wife has died.

Jerry informs Gustafson that the kidnappers have demanded $1 million, and will deal only 
through him. Meanwhile, Carl, in light of the complication of three murders, demands that Jerry 
hand over the entire $80,000. GMAC gives Jerry 24 hours to prove the existence of the vehicles 
or return the loan.

Carl is beaten by a furious Proudfoot for bringing him under suspicion. Carl orders Jerry to 
deliver the ransom immediately. Gustafson insists on making the money drop himself. At the 
drop point in a Minneapolis parking garage, he tells Carl he will not hand over the money 
without seeing Jean. An enraged Carl shoots and kills Gustafson, but not before Gustafson 
shoots Carl in the face. After fleeing the scene, Carl is astounded to discover that the briefcase 
contains $1 million. He removes $80,000 to split with Gaear, then buries the rest alongside the 
highway. At the cabin, Gaear has killed Jean; Carl says they must split up and leave the state 
immediately. Carl and Gaear get into a heated argument over who will keep the dealership car 
with Carl using his injury as justification. In response, Gaear kills Carl with an axe.

Marge learns that Yanagita's dead wife is neither dead nor his wife. Reflecting on Yanagita's 
convincing lies, Marge returns to Gustafson's dealership. Jerry continues to insist that he is not 
missing any cars. Marge asks him to check the inventory, then spots him fleeing the dealership, 
and calls the State Police. The next morning, she drives to Moose Lake on a tip from a local bar 
owner who reported a "funny-looking guy" bragging about killing someone. Outside a cabin, 
she finds the dealership car; nearby, Gaear is feeding Carl's dismembered body into a 
woodchipper. Marge shoots him in the leg as he tries to flee, and arrests him. North Dakota 
police arrest Jerry at a motel outside Bismarck.

Marge's husband Norm, whose mallard painting has been selected for a 3-cent postage stamp, 
complains that his friend's painting will be on the first class stamp. Marge reassures Norm that 
lots of people use 3-cent stamps; the two happily anticipate the birth of their child in two 
months.
