While visiting the earth in a California forest at night, a group of alien botanists land in a spacecraft. 
When government agents appear on the scene, the aliens flee in their spaceship, leaving one of 
their own behind in their haste. At a suburban home, a ten-year-old boy named Elliott is spending 
time with his brother, Michael, and his friends. As he returns from picking up a pizza, he discovers 
that something is hiding in their tool shed. The alien promptly flees upon being discovered. Despite 
his family's disbelief, Elliott leaves Reese's Pieces candy to lure the alien to his house. Before going 
to sleep, Elliott realizes it is imitating his movements. He feigns illness the next morning to stay 
home from school and play with it. Later that day, Michael and their five-year-old sister, Gertie, meet 
it. They decide to keep it hidden from their mother, Mary. When they ask it about its origin, it levitates 
several balls to represent its planetary system and then demonstrates its powers by reviving 
dead chrysanthemums.
At school the next day, Elliott begins to experience a psychic connection with the alien, including 
exhibiting signs of intoxication (because it is at his home, drinking beer), and he begins freeing all 
the frogs in his biology class. As the alien watches John Wayne kiss Maureen O'Hara in The Quiet 
Man on television, Elliott then kisses a girl he likes in the same manner and is sent to the principal's 
office.
The alien learns to speak English by repeating what Gertie says as she watches Sesame Street and, 
at Elliott's urging, dubs itself "E.T." E.T. reads a comic strip where Buck Rogers, stranded, calls for 
help by building a makeshift communication device and is inspired to try it himself. E.T. receives 
Elliott's help in building a device to "phone home" by using a Speak & Spell toy. Michael notices that 
E.T.'s health is declining and that Elliott is referring to himself as "we".
On Halloween, Michael and Elliott dress E.T. as a ghost so they can sneak him out of the house. 
That night, Elliott and E.T. head through the forest, where they make a successful call home. The 
next day, Elliott wakes up in the field, only to find E.T. gone. Elliott returns home to his distressed 
family. Michael searches for and finds E.T. dying next to a culvert, being investigated by a raccoon. 
Michael takes E.T. home to Elliott, who is also dying. Mary becomes frightened when she discovers 
her son's illness and the dying alien, just as government agents invade the house. Scientists set up 
a hospital at the house, questioning Michael, Mary and Gertie while treating Elliott and E.T. Their 
connection disappears and E.T. then appears to die while Elliott recovers. A grief-stricken Elliott is 
left alone with the motionless E.T. when he notices a dead chrysanthemum, the plant E.T. had 
previously revived, coming back to life. E.T. reanimates and reveals that his people are returning. 
Elliott and Michael steal a van that E.T. had been loaded into and a chase ensues, with Michael's 
friends joining them as they attempt to evade the authorities by bicycles. Suddenly facing a police 
roadblock, they escape as E.T. uses telekinesis to lift them into the air and toward the forest, like he 
had done for Elliott before.
Standing near the spaceship, E.T.'s heart glows as he prepares to return home. Mary, Gertie, and 
"Keys", a friendly government agent, show up. E.T. says goodbye to Michael and Gertie, as she 
presents him with the chrysanthemum that he had revived. Before boarding the spaceship, he tells 
Elliott "I'll be right here", pointing his glowing finger to Elliott's forehead. He then picks up the 
chrysanthemum, boards the spaceship, and it takes off, leaving a rainbow in the sky as everyone 
watches it leave.
