An elderly Antonio Salieri(F. Murray Abraham) confesses to the murder of his former colleague,Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart(Tom Hulce) and attempts to kill himself by slitting his throat. Two servants take him to a mental asylum where a priest, Father Vogler (Richard Frank), implores him to confess.Salieri recounts how, even in his youth, he desired to be a composer, much to the chagrin of his father. He prays to God that, if he will make Salieri a famous composer, he will in return promise his faithfulness. Soon after, his father dies, which Salieri takes as a sign that God has accepted his vow. He is educated in Vienna and becomes court composer toEmperor Joseph II(Jeffrey Jones).Mozart arrives in Vienna to perform at the request of his employer,the Prince-Archbishop of Salzburg(Nicholas Kepros). Salieri attends the performance to meet Mozart, discovers thatMozart is obsceneand immature, and yet Salieri finds Mozart's talent to be transcendent.The Emperor desires to commission Mozart to write an opera and, despite the reservations of his advisers, summons him to the palace. Mozart happily accepts the job, much to the annoyance of Salieri. Mozart premieresDie aus dem Serailto d reviews from the Emperor. Salieri suspects that Mozart has slept with the star,Caterina Cavalieri(Christine Ebersole), despite his engagement toConstanze Weber(Elizabeth Berridge).The Emperor desires that Mozart instruct his niece,Princess Elisabeth, in music, but Salieri discourages him from doing so. Constanze visits Salieri to persuade him to make the Emperor reconsider, but she is unsuccessful.Salieri is enraged that God has bestowed upon Mozart the talent he has so desperately desired and vows to destroy Mozart. Mozart, meanwhile, struggles to find work and begins drinking. His father,Leopold Mozart(Roy Dotrice), comes to visit him in Vienna. Constanze and Mozart take Leopold to a masked party (which Salieri also attends), where Mozart entertains the guests with musical antics. Leopold disapproves of his son's hedonism and the family argues until Leopold leaves town.Salieri hires a young girl 
(Cynthia Nixon) to pose as the Mozarts' maid while spying for him. She takes him to the Mozart residence, where he discovers that Mozart is working on an opera based on the playThe Marriage of Figaro, which the Emperor has forbidden. When Mozart is summoned to court to explain, he manages to convince the Emperor to allowhis operato premiere, despite Salieri and the advisers' attempts at sabotage.Messengers arrive in Vienna with news of Leopold's death, and in response a grief-stricken Mozart pensDon Giovanni. Salieri recognizes the dead commander as symbolic of Leopold and hatches a plan. Wearing Leopold's party mask, Salieri visits Mozart and commissions . Salieri plots to kill Mozart once the piece is finished, then premiere it at Mozart's funeral, claiming the work as his own.At a parody of one of Mozart's own operas,
Emanuel Schikaneder(Simon Callow) asks Mozart to write an opera for his theater. Mozart, desperate for money, obliges, despite Constanze's insistence that he finish the Requiem Mass. The couple fight and Constanze leaves with their young son,Karl.Mozart collapses during a performance of his finished work,The Magic Flute. Salieri takes him home and offers his assistance on the Requiem. Salieri transcribes Mozart's verbal commands, and they work through the night. The next morning, a gravely ill 
Mozart apologizes to Salieri for his previous behavior. A guilty Constanze returns home and locksthe unfinished Requiemaway, only to find that Mozart has died from overwork. Mozart is taken out of the city and unceremoniously buried in a mass grave.Having finished his tale, Salieri asks how a merciful God could destroy his own beloved just to keep a mediocrity like Salieri from sharing in his glory. As he is pushed down the hall in a wheelchair, Salieri declares himself the patron saint of mediocrities and mockingly absolves the other patients of their own inadequacies. 

Mozart's high-pitched laugh is heard as the screen fades to black.
