United States Air Force Brigadier General Jack D. Ripper is commander of Burpelson Air Force 
Base, which houses the Strategic Air Command 843rd Bomb Wing, equipped with B-52 bombers 
and nuclear bombs. The 843rd is currently in-flight on airborne alert, two hours from their targets 
inside Russia.
General Ripper orders his executive officer, Group Captain Lionel Mandrake of the UK Royal Air 
Force, to put the base on alert. Ripper also issues "Wing Attack Plan R" to the patrolling aircraft, one 
of which is commanded by Major T. J. "King" Kong. All of the aircraft commence an attack flight on 
Russia and set their radios to allow communications only through the CRM 114 discriminator, which 
is programmed to accept only communications preceded by a secret three-letter code known only to 
General Ripper. Mandrake discovers that no war order has been issued by the Pentagon and tries to 
stop Ripper, who locks them both in his office. Ripper tells Mandrake that he believes the Soviets 
have been using fluoridation of United States water supplies to pollute the "precious bodily fluids" of 
Americans. Mandrake now realizes that Ripper is insane.
In the War Room at the Pentagon, General Buck Turgidson briefs President Merkin Muffley and 
other officers about how Plan R enables a senior officer to launch a strike against the Soviets if all 
superiors have been killed in a first strike on Washington, D.C. Turgidson reports that his men are 
trying every possible three-letter CRM code to issue the stand-down order, but that could take over 
two days and the planes are due to reach their targets in about an hour. Muffley orders the Army 
chief to storm the base and arrest General Ripper. Turgidson attempts to convince Muffley to let the 
attack continue, but Muffley refuses to be party to a nuclear first strike. Instead, he brings Soviet 
ambassador Alexei de Sadeski into the War Room, to telephone Soviet premier Dimitri Kissov on the 
"hot line". Muffley warns the Premier of the impending attack and offers to reveal the planes' 
positions and targets so the Russians can protect themselves.
After a heated discussion in Russian with the Premier, the ambassador informs President Muffley 
that the Soviet Union has created a doomsday device, which consists of many buried bombs 
jacketed with "Cobalt-Thorium G" connected to a computer network set to detonate them 
automatically should any nuclear attack strike the country. Within two months after detonation, the 
Cobalt-Thorium G would encircle the earth in a radioactive "doomsday shroud", wiping out all human 
and animal life, rendering the surface of the earth uninhabitable for 93 years. The device cannot be 
dismantled or "untriggered", as it is programmed to explode if any such attempt is made. When the 
President's wheelchair-bound scientific advisor, former Nazi Dr. Strangelove, points out that such a 
doomsday device would only be an effective deterrent if everyone knew about it, de Sadeski replies 
that the Russian Premier had planned to reveal its existence to the world the following week.
Meanwhile, United States Army forces arrive at Burpelson, still sealed by Ripper's order, and soon 
take over the base. Ripper kills himself, while Mandrake identifies Ripper's CRM code from his desk 
blotter ("OPE," a variant of both Peace on Earth and Purity of Essence)[4] and relays this code to the 
Pentagon. Using the recall code, SAC successfully recalls all of the aircraft except one. No one in 
the War Room knows that a surface-to-air missile has ruptured the fuel tank of that plane and 
destroyed its communications device, making it impossible to recall this particular plane even with 
Muffley discloses the plane's target to help the Soviets find it, but Major Kong, his fuel dwindling, has 
selected a closer target. As the plane approaches the new target, the crew is unable to open the 
damaged bomb bay doors. Major Kong enters the bomb bay and repairs the broken electric wiring, 
whereupon the doors open. With Kong straddling it like a rodeo bull, the bomb falls and detonates.
In the War Room, Dr. Strangelove recommends that the President gather several hundred thousand 
people to live in deep mineshafts where the radiation will not penetrate. He suggests a 10:1 female-
to-male ratio for a breeding program to repopulate the Earth when the radiation has subsided. 
Turgidson, worried that the Soviets will do the same, warns about a "mineshaft gap." Dr. Strangelove 
comes out of his wheelchair and loudly announces that he can walk again. Just then the doomsday 
device kicks into operation and the film ends with a montage of nuclear detonations, accompanied 
by Vera Lynn's version of the World War II-era song "We'll Meet Again".
