The galaxy is in the midst of a civil war. Spies for the Rebel Alliance have stolen plans to the 
Galactic Empire's Death Star, a space station capable of destroying an entire planet. Rebel 
leader Princess Leia has the plans, but her ship is captured by Imperial forces under the 
command of the ruthless Sith Lord, Darth Vader. Before she is captured, Leia hides the plans in 
the memory of an astromech droid, R2-D2, along with a holographic recording. R2-D2 flees to 
the desert planet Tatooine with C-3PO, a protocol droid.

The droids are captured by Jawa traders, who sell them to moisture farmers Owen and Beru 
Lars, and their nephew Luke Skywalker. While cleaning R2-D2, Luke accidentally triggers part of 
Leia's message, in which she requests help from Obi-Wan Kenobi. The next morning, Luke finds 
R2-D2 missing, and meets Ben Kenobi, an old hermit who lives in the hills, and reveals himself 
to be Obi-Wan. Obi-Wan tells Luke of his days as one of the Jedi Knights, former Galactic 
Republic peacekeepers with supernatural powers derived from an energy called the Force, who 
were all but wiped out by the Empire. Contrary to his uncle's statements, Luke learns that his 
father fought alongside Obi-Wan as a Jedi Knight. Obi-Wan tells Luke that Vader was his former 
pupil, who turned to the dark side of the Force. Obi-Wan then presents to Luke his father's 
weapon - a lightsaber.

Obi-Wan views Leia's complete message, in which she begs him to take the Death Star plans to 
her home planet of Alderaan and give them to her father for analysis. Obi-Wan invites Luke to 
accompany him to Alderaan and learn the ways of the Force. Luke declines, but changes his 
mind after discovering that Imperial stormtroopers have destroyed the moisture farm, killing 
his aunt and uncle. Obi-Wan and Luke travel to Mos Eisley, where they meet smuggler Han Solo 
and his Wookiee first mate Chewbacca at a Cantina. They join forces and board the Millennium 
Falcon.

Upon the Falcon's arrival at the location of Alderaan, the group discovers that the planet has 
been destroyed by order of the Death Star's commanding officer, Grand Moff Tarkin, as a show 
of power. The Falcon is captured by the Death Star's tractor beam, and brought into its hangar 
bay. While Obi-Wan goes to disable the tractor beam, Luke discovers that Leia is imprisoned 
aboard, and with the help of Han and Chewbacca, Luke rescues her. After several escapes, the 
group makes its way back to the Falcon. On the way back to the Falcon, Obi-Wan engages in a 
lightsaber duel with Vader. To ensure the rest of the team escapes the Death Star alive, Obi-
Wan sacrifices himself at the hands of Darth Vader. The Falcon escapes from the Death Star, 
unknowingly carrying a tracking beacon, which the Empire follows to the Rebels' hidden base 
on Yavin IV.

The Rebels analyze the Death Star's plans and identify a vulnerable exhaust port that connects 
to the station's main reactor, and that the Death Star can be destroyed through a chain 
reaction. Luke joins the Rebel's squadron, while Han collects his payment for the transport and 
intends to leave, despite Luke's request that he should stay and help. In the ensuing battle, the 
Rebels suffer heavy losses after several unsuccessful attack runs, leaving Luke as one of the few 
surviving pilots. Vader leads a squadron of TIE fighters and prepares to attack Luke's X-wing 
fighter, but Han returns and fires at the Imperials, sending Vader spiraling away. Helped by 
guidance from Obi-Wan's spirit, Luke uses the Force to destroy the Death Star seconds before it 
can fire on the Rebel base. Back on Yavin IV, Leia awards Luke and Han with medals for their 
heroism.
