In 1936, archaeologist Indiana Jones braves an ancient booby-trapped temple in Peru and 
retrieves a golden idol. He is confronted by rival archaeologist Ren? Belloq and the indigenous 
Hovito people. Surrounded and outnumbered, Jones surrenders the idol to Belloq and escapes 
aboard a waiting floatplane.

Jones returns to his teaching position at Marshall College, a fictitious New England college, 
where he is interviewed by two Army Intelligence agents. They inform Jones that the Nazis are 
searching for his old mentor, Abner Ravenwood, under whom Jones studied at the University of 
Chicago. The Nazis know that Ravenwood is the leading expert on the ancient city of Tanis in 
Egypt, and that he possesses the headpiece of the Staff of Ra. Jones deduces that the Nazis are 
searching for the Ark of the Covenant - the Nazis believe that if they acquire the Ark, their 
armies will become invincible. The Staff of Ra is the key to finding the Well of Souls, a secret 
chamber in which the Ark is buried.

The agents authorize Jones to recover the Ark to prevent the Nazis from obtaining it. He travels 
to Nepal and discovers that Ravenwood has died, and the headpiece is in the possession of 
Ravenwood's daughter Marion. Jones visits Marion at her tavern, where she reveals her bitter 
feelings toward him from a previous romantic affair. She physically rebuffs his offer to buy the 
headpiece, and Jones leaves. Shortly after, a group of thugs arrive with their Nazi commander 
Arnold Toht. Toht threatens Marion to get the headpiece but Jones returns to the bar and fights 
the Nazis to save Marion. During the fight the bar is set ablaze and the headpiece lands in the 
flames. Toht severely burns his hand trying to take the hot headpiece and flees the tavern 
screaming. Jones and Marion escape with the headpiece, and Marion decides to accompany 
Jones in his search for the Ark so he can repay his debt to her.

The pair travels to Cairo, where they meet up with Jones' friend and skilled digger Sallah. Sallah 
informs them that Belloq and the Nazis are digging for the Well of Souls with a replica of the 
headpiece (created from the scar on Toht's hand). They quickly realize the Nazi headpiece is 
incomplete and that the Nazis are digging in the wrong place. The Nazis kidnap Marion and it 
appears to Jones that she is killed in an exploding truck. After a confrontation with Belloq in a 
local bar, Jones and Sallah infiltrate the Nazi dig site and use their staff to correctly locate the 
Ark. Jones discovers Marion is alive when he finds her bound and gagged in a tent. He refuses 
to release her out of fear of alerting the Nazis. Jones, Sallah, and a small group of diggers 
unearth the Well of Souls and acquire the Ark. Belloq and Nazi officer Colonel Dietrich arrive 
and seize the Ark from Jones, throwing Marion into the Well of Souls with him before sealing it 
back up. Jones and Marion escape to a local airstrip, where Jones has a fistfight with a Nazi 
mechanic and destroys the flying wing that was to transport the Ark to Berlin. The panicked 
Nazis remove the Ark in a truck and set off for Cairo, but Jones catches them and retakes it. He 
makes arrangements to take the Ark to London aboard a tramp steamer.

The next day, a Nazi U-boat appears and intercepts the ship. Belloq and Dietrich seize the Ark 
and Marion but cannot locate Jones, who stows away aboard the U-boat and travels with them 
to an island in the Aegean Sea. Once there, Belloq plans to test the power of the Ark before 
presenting it to Hitler. Jones reveals himself and threatens to destroy the Ark with a 
panzerfaust, but Belloq calls his bluff and Jones surrenders rather than destroy such an 
important historical artifact. The Nazis take Jones and Marion to an area where the Ark will be 
opened and tie them to a post to observe. Belloq performs a ceremonial opening of the Ark and 
finds it contains nothing but sand. Suddenly, angelic ghost-like beings emerge from the Ark and 
Jones cautions Marion to keep her eyes closed and not to look no matter what happens. Belloq 
and the others look on in astonishment as the apparitions are suddenly revealed to be angels of 
death. A vortex of flame forms above the Ark and shoots bolts of fiery energy into the gathered 
Nazi soldiers, killing them all. As Belloq, Toht and Dietrich all scream in terror the Ark turns its 
fury on them: Dietrich's head shrivels up, Toht's face is melted off his skull and Belloq's head 
explodes. Flames then engulf the remains of the doomed assembly, save for Jones and Marion, 
and the pillar of fire rises into the sky. The Ark's lid is blasted high into the air before dropping 
back down onto the Ark and sealing it. Jones and Marion find their ropes burned off and 
embrace.

In Washington, D.C., the Army Intelligence agents inform Jones and Marcus Brody that the Ark 
is someplace safe and will be studied by "top men". The Ark is shown being stored in a giant 
government warehouse among countless similar crates.
