In an African desert millions of years ago, a tribe of hominids is driven away from its water hole 
by a rival tribe. They awaken to find a featureless black monolith has appeared before them. 
Influenced by the monolith, they discover how to use a bone as a weapon and drive their rivals 
away from the water hole.

Millions of years later, a Pan Am spaceplane carries Dr. Heywood Floyd to the huge Space 
Station 5 orbiting Earth for a layover on his trip to Clavius Base, a United States outpost on the 
Moon. After Floyd has a videophone call with his daughter, he rebuffs questions from his Soviet 
scientist friend and her colleague about rumors of a mysterious epidemic at Clavius Base. Floyd 
heads a meeting of Clavius Base personnel, apologizing for the epidemic cover story but 
stressing secrecy. His mission is to investigate a recently found artifact buried four million years 
ago. Floyd and others ride in a Moonbus to the artifact, a monolith identical to the one 
encountered by the ape-men. Sunlight strikes the monolith and a loud high-pitched radio signal 
is heard.

Eighteen months later, the United States spacecraft Discovery One is bound for Jupiter. On 
board are mission pilots and scientists Dr. David Bowman and Dr. Frank Poole, along with three 
other scientists in suspended animation. Most of Discovery's operations are controlled by the 
ship's computer, HAL 9000, referred to by the crew as "Hal". Hal states that he is "foolproof and 
incapable of error". Hal raises concerns about the nature of the mission to Bowman, which the 
latter ignores. Hal then reports the imminent failure of an antenna control device. The 
astronauts retrieve it in an extravehicular activity (EVA) pod but find nothing wrong. Hal 
suggests reinstalling the device and letting it fail so the problem can be found. Mission Control 
advises the astronauts that results from their twin HAL 9000 indicate that Hal is in error. Hal 
insists that the problem, like previous issues ascribed to HAL series units, is due to human error. 
Concerned about Hal's behavior, Bowman and Poole enter an EVA pod to talk without Hal 
overhearing, and agree to disconnect Hal if he is proven wrong. Hal secretly follows their 
conversation by lip reading. While Poole is on a space walk outside his EVA pod attempting to 
replace the unit, Hal takes control of the pod, severs his oxygen hose and sets him adrift.

Bowman takes another pod to rescue Poole. Meanwhile, Hal turns off the life support functions 
of the crewmen in suspended animation. When Bowman returns to the ship with Poole's body, 
Hal refuses to let him in, stating that the astronauts' plan to deactivate him jeopardizes the 
mission. Bowman opens the ship's emergency airlock manually, enters the ship, and proceeds 
to Hal's processor core. Hal tries to reassure Bowman, then pleads with him to stop, and finally 
expresses fear. As Bowman gradually deactivates the circuits controlling Hal's higher intellectual 
functions, Hal regresses to his earliest programmed memory, the song "Daisy Bell", which he 
sings for Bowman.

When Bowman disconnects Hal, a prerecorded video message from Floyd reveals the existence 
of the monolith on the moon, its purpose and origin unknown. The object has been inert save 
for a powerful radio emission aimed at Jupiter. Only Hal had been told of the mission's true 
objectives.

At Jupiter, Bowman leaves Discovery One in an EVA pod to investigate another monolith 
discovered in orbit around the planet. The pod is pulled into a vortex of colored light, and 
Bowman races across vast distances of space, viewing bizarre cosmological phenomena and 
strange landscapes of unusual colors.

Bowman finds himself in a bedroom appointed in the neoclassical style. He sees, and then 
becomes, older versions of himself, first standing in the bedroom, middle-aged and still in his 
spacesuit, then dressed in leisure attire and eating dinner, and finally as an old man lying in the 
bed. A monolith appears at the foot of the bed, and as Bowman reaches for it, he is 
transformed into a fetus enclosed in a transparent orb of light. The new being floats in space 
beside the Earth, gazing at it.

