Twenty years in the past,Professor Charles Xavierand Erik Lehnsherrmeet young Jean Greyat her parents' house to invite her to join their school, theX-Mansion. Ten years later, the industrialist father of Warren Worthington IIIdiscovers his son is amutantas Warren tries to cut off his wings.
In the present, Worthington Labs announces it has developed an inoculation to suppress the X-gene that givesmutantstheir abilities, and offer the "cure" to any mutant who wants it. The cure is created from the genome of a young mutant namedJimmy, who lives at the Worthington facility onAlcatraz Island. While some mutants are interested in the cure, including theX-Men'sRogue, many others are horrified by the announcement. Lehnsherr re-establishes hisBrotherhood of Mutantswith those who oppose the cure, warning his followers that the cure will be forcefully used to exterminate the mutant race.
With help fromPyro, Lehnsherr recruitsCallistoand several other mutants. They attack the mobile prison holding Mystique to free her, also freeingJuggernautandMultiple Man. Mystique saves Lehnsherr by taking a shot of the mutant cure aimed at him, rendering Raven Darkhlme human. Hateful of humans, Lehnsherr abandons Darkhlme, much to her shock and disappointment. Meanwhile,Scott Summers, still distraught overthe lossof his fiance, Jean Grey, drives to her resting location at Alkali Lake. Jean appears to Summers but, as the two kiss, Jean kills him. Sensing trouble, Xavier sendsLoganandStormto investigate. When they arrive, they find onlytelekineticallyfloating rocks, Summers' glasses, and an unconscious Jean.
When they return to the X-Mansion, Xavier explains to Logan that when Jean sacrificed herself, she also freed the "Phoenix", a dark and powerfulalternate personalitywhich Xavier had telepathically repressed, fearing the Phoenix's destructive potential. Logan is disgusted to learn of this psychic tampering with Jean's mind but, once she awakens, he discovers that she killed Summers and is not the Jean Grey he once knew. The Phoenix emerges, knocks out Logan, and escapes to her childhood home.
Lehnsherr learns of Jean's resurrection through Callisto, and the X-Men arrive at the Grey home at the same time as the Brotherhood. Lehnsherr and Xavier go in alone, and both vie for Jean's loyalty until the Phoenix resurfaces. She destroys the house and disintegrates Xavier before leaving with Lehnsherr. The Brotherhood decides to strike Worthington Labs, and the government sends multiple teams to attack the Brotherhood's base in the forest, with information gained from Darkhlme, furious over Lehnsherr's betrayal. However, the life forms in the camp are all copies of Multiple Man, and Lehnsherr uses his powers to move theGolden Gate Bridgeso he and his army can get to Alcatraz and facilitate the attack on Worthington Labs. The remaining X-Men confront the Brotherhood, despite being significantly outnumbered, and arrive just as the military troops who thus far have been neutralizing the attacking mutants are overwhelmed by the Brotherhood.
During the fight,Kitty Prydesaves Jimmy from Juggernaut, who had been sent to kill him. Logan has Colossus throw him at Lehnsherr and distract him long enough forHank McCoyto inject Lehnsherr with the "cure" and thus nullify his powers. Army reinforcements arrive and shoot at Jean just as Logan had calmed her down. The Phoenix is awakened by the attack and disintegrates the troops in retaliation. The Phoenix then begins to destroy Alcatraz and anyone within range of her powers. Logan realizes that only he can stop the Phoenix due to hishealing factorandadamantiumskeleton. When Logan approaches her, Jean momentarily gains control and begs him to save her. Logan fatally stabs Jean, destroying the Phoenix, but mourns for her death.
Sometime later, mutant rights are finally obtained and Xavier's school is still operating with Storm as headmistress. The President of the United States appoints McCoy as ambassador to theUnited Nations. Rogue reveals toBobby Drakethat she has taken the cure, much to his disappointment. Meanwhile, Lehnsherr sits alone at a chessboard in a San Francisco park. As he gestures toward a metal chess piece, it wobbles slightly, indicating his powers to be returning and the "cure" to be temporary.
In apost-credits scene,Moira MacTaggertchecks on a comatose patient[7]who greets her with Xavier's voice, leaving her startled.

